taytsh/spec/middleend-spec-v2.md, before:

# Tongues Middleend v2

The middleend is a pipeline of analysis passes over Taytsh IR. Every pass reads the IR and annotations from prior passes, then writes new annotations. No pass modifies IR structure — the tree the lowerer produces is the tree backends read.

## Pipeline

```
lowerer → scope → returns → liveness → hoisting → ownership → backends
```

All passes are intra-procedural (per-function) unless noted otherwise.

## Pass Summaries

### 1. Scope

Spec: scope-spec-v2.md

Foundation pass. Binding-level facts for every declaration site, use-site facts for every identifier reference.

Produces:
- scope.is_reassigned, scope.is_const     (all binding declarations)
- scope.is_modified, scope.is_unused      (parameters)
- scope.narrowed_type                     (use sites after nil checks / match arms)
- scope.is_interface, scope.is_function_ref (use sites)

No dependencies.

### 2. Returns

Analyze return patterns and control flow termination.

Produces:
- returns.always_returns        (block)     does every path return/throw/exit?
- returns.needs_named_returns   (function)  try/catch body returns require Go named returns
- returns.may_return_nil        (function)  function may return nil at runtime
- returns.body_has_return       (try node)  try body contains return (Lua/Perl/Zig workaround)

No dependencies. Pure control-flow walk.

### 3. Liveness

Dead store and unused binding analysis.

Produces:
- liveness.initial_value_unused   (let declaration)  init overwritten before read
- liveness.catch_var_unused       (catch binding)     catch variable never referenced
- liveness.match_var_unused       (case/default binding) binding never referenced
- liveness.tuple_unused_indices   (tuple assignment)  which targets are never used

Depends on: scope (reads scope.is_unused to avoid redundant work, but can run independently with degraded precision).

### 4. Hoisting

Declaration placement for languages requiring pre-declaration (Go) and loop annotation for languages lacking native continue (Lua).

Produces:
- hoisting.hoisted_vars    (if/try/while/for/match)  [(name, type)] to hoist
- hoisting.has_continue    (while/for)                body contains continue
- hoisting.rune_vars       (function)                 string vars needing rune conversion (Go)

Depends on: scope (reads scope.is_reassigned to know which vars are assigned inside control structures).

### 5. Ownership

Memory ownership and escape analysis for non-GC targets (C, Rust, Zig).

Produces:
- ownership.kind      (binding declaration)  owned | borrowed | shared
- ownership.escapes   (expression)           value escapes current scope
- ownership.region    (binding declaration)  lifetime region identifier

Depends on: scope (reads scope.is_modified for mutation tracking, scope.is_const for immutability guarantees), liveness (reads initial_value_unused to avoid tracking dead stores).

Skippable for GC targets. The pass is a no-op when the target set excludes C, Rust, Zig, and Swift.

## Dependency Graph

All backends read scope and liveness annotations directly. The graph uses liveness (the last universal pass) as the anchor and shows conditional pass edges to backend groups partitioned by their unique dependency profiles.

```mermaid
graph LR
    lowerer --> scope
    lowerer --> returns

    scope --> liveness
    scope --> hoisting
    scope --> ownership
    liveness --> ownership

    liveness --> g1["C#, Java, JavaScript,
PHP, Python, Ruby, TypeScript"]:::lang
    liveness --> g2["Dart, Perl"]:::lang
    liveness --> g3["Go, Lua"]:::lang
    liveness --> g4["C, Rust, Swift"]:::lang
    liveness --> g5["Zig"]:::lang

    returns --> g1
    returns --> g2
    returns --> g3
    returns --> g4
    returns --> g5
    hoisting --> g3
    ownership --> g4
    ownership --> g5

    classDef lang fill:#e8d44d,stroke:#b8a62e,color:#333
```

## Annotation Namespacing

Each pass writes under its own namespace: scope.*, returns.*, liveness.*, hoisting.*, ownership.*. Annotations are write-once: no pass overwrites another's keys.

## Target-Conditional Passes

Not all passes are needed for all targets:

| Pass      | Always runs | Conditional                             |
| --------- | ----------- | --------------------------------------- |
| scope     | yes         |                                         |
| returns   | yes         |                                         |
| liveness  | yes         |                                         |
| hoisting  | no          | Go, Lua, or any target needing pre-decl |
| ownership | no          | C, Rust, Zig, Swift                     |

Commit message:

Add v2 callgraph middleend spec and integrate across specs/AST
New spec: callgraph-spec-v2.md — inter-procedural pass for throw type
propagation, recursion/SCC detection, and tail call identification.
Includes interface dispatch, strict-mode traps, and detailed tail
position rules.

Updates middleend-spec-v2.md pipeline, dependency graph, and
target-conditional table. Adds callgraph.* consumption section to
backend-spec-v2.md. Adds annotations field to TCall in the AST.

taytsh/spec/middleend-spec-v2.md, after:

# Tongues Middleend v2

The middleend is a pipeline of analysis passes over Taytsh IR. Every pass reads the IR and annotations from prior passes, then writes new annotations. No pass modifies IR structure — the tree the lowerer produces is the tree backends read.

## Pipeline

```
lowerer → scope → returns → liveness → hoisting → ownership → backends
            \                                                /
             `--→ callgraph ---→---→---→---→---→---→---→---'
```

All passes are intra-procedural (per-function) except callgraph, which is inter-procedural (whole-module).

## Pass Summaries

### 1. Scope

Spec: scope-spec-v2.md

Foundation pass. Binding-level facts for every declaration site, use-site facts for every identifier reference.

Produces:
- scope.is_reassigned, scope.is_const     (all binding declarations)
- scope.is_modified, scope.is_unused      (parameters)
- scope.narrowed_type                     (use sites after nil checks / match arms)
- scope.is_interface, scope.is_function_ref (use sites)

No dependencies.

### 2. Returns

Analyze return patterns and control flow termination.

Produces:
- returns.always_returns        (block)     does every path return/throw/exit?
- returns.needs_named_returns   (function)  try/catch body returns require Go named returns
- returns.may_return_nil        (function)  function may return nil at runtime
- returns.body_has_return       (try node)  try body contains return (Lua/Perl/Zig workaround)

No dependencies. Pure control-flow walk.

### 3. Liveness

Dead store and unused binding analysis.

Produces:
- liveness.initial_value_unused   (let declaration)  init overwritten before read
- liveness.catch_var_unused       (catch binding)     catch variable never referenced
- liveness.match_var_unused       (case/default binding) binding never referenced
- liveness.tuple_unused_indices   (tuple assignment)  which targets are never used

Depends on: scope (reads scope.is_unused to avoid redundant work, but can run independently with degraded precision).

### 4. Hoisting

Declaration placement for languages requiring pre-declaration (Go) and loop annotation for languages lacking native continue (Lua).

Produces:
- hoisting.hoisted_vars    (if/try/while/for/match)  [(name, type)] to hoist
- hoisting.has_continue    (while/for)                body contains continue
- hoisting.rune_vars       (function)                 string vars needing rune conversion (Go)

Depends on: scope (reads scope.is_reassigned to know which vars are assigned inside control structures).

### 5. Ownership

Memory ownership and escape analysis for non-GC targets (C, Rust, Zig).

Produces:
- ownership.kind      (binding declaration)  owned | borrowed | shared
- ownership.escapes   (expression)           value escapes current scope
- ownership.region    (binding declaration)  lifetime region identifier

Depends on: scope (reads scope.is_modified for mutation tracking, scope.is_const for immutability guarantees), liveness (reads initial_value_unused to avoid tracking dead stores).

Skippable for GC targets. The pass is a no-op when the target set excludes C, Rust, Zig, and Swift.

### 6. Callgraph

Spec: callgraph-spec-v2.md

Inter-procedural call graph analysis. Throw type propagation, recursion detection, tail call identification.

Produces:
- callgraph.throws              (function)    exception types that can escape
- callgraph.is_recursive        (function)    direct or mutual recursion
- callgraph.recursive_group     (function)    SCC identifier
- callgraph.is_tail_call        (call site)   call is in tail position

No dependencies on other passes. Reads raw IR only. Runs in parallel with the intra-procedural pipeline.

Skippable when the target set excludes Go, Rust, Zig, and Lua (the targets that transform exceptions into return values or need tail call syntax). Always useful for diagnostics.

## Dependency Graph

All backends read scope and liveness annotations directly. Callgraph runs in parallel with the intra-procedural pipeline (no shared dependencies). The graph uses liveness (the last universal intra-procedural pass) as the anchor and shows conditional pass edges to backend groups partitioned by their unique dependency profiles.

```mermaid
graph LR
    lowerer --> scope
    lowerer --> returns
    lowerer --> callgraph

    scope --> liveness
    scope --> hoisting
    scope --> ownership
    liveness --> ownership

    liveness --> g1["C#, Java, JavaScript,
PHP, Python, Ruby, TypeScript"]:::lang
    liveness --> g2["Dart, Perl"]:::lang
    liveness --> g3["Go, Lua"]:::lang
    liveness --> g4["C, Rust, Swift"]:::lang
    liveness --> g5["Zig"]:::lang

    returns --> g1
    returns --> g2
    returns --> g3
    returns --> g4
    returns --> g5
    hoisting --> g3
    callgraph --> g3
    callgraph --> g4
    callgraph --> g5
    ownership --> g4
    ownership --> g5

    classDef lang fill:#e8d44d,stroke:#b8a62e,color:#333
```

## Annotation Namespacing

Each pass writes under its own namespace: scope.*, returns.*, liveness.*, hoisting.*, ownership.*, callgraph.*. Annotations are write-once: no pass overwrites another's keys.

## Target-Conditional Passes

Not all passes are needed for all targets:

| Pass      | Always runs | Conditional                             |
| --------- | ----------- | --------------------------------------- |
| scope     | yes         |                                         |
| returns   | yes         |                                         |
| liveness  | yes         |                                         |
| hoisting  | no          | Go, Lua, or any target needing pre-decl |
| ownership | no          | C, Rust, Zig, Swift                     |
| callgraph | no          | Go, Rust, Zig, Lua                      |
